---
layout: post
title: Testing as an Aspie
published: true
tags: aspergers autism personal personal_story 
---

A little story about my perspective...

## What the hell is an Aspie?

Technically, Aspie is an outdated term. It's what people, who were diagnosed with Asperger Syndrome, call themselves. And I say it's outdated since today we consider the "Asperger Syndrome" part of "Autism Spectrum Disorders" (or short ASD). Another term, that is disputed in Aspie media is "High functioning Autism". It is a neurological divergence to the average of people on this planet. It's not a mental illness. But it's often combined with mental issues like a tendency to anxiety issues.

Wait. Asperger's? Isn't that what for example Greta Thunberg has? Yes. But Aspies, and especially female Aspies, are as different from each other as "flowers in a bouquet", as an Aspie interviewee of a TV show put it. Or as zebra's stripes, as I would describe it; same colour scheme but the the shapes differ extensively. Some Aspies fight more with daily life in a world shaped for neuro-typicals than others; and everyone's exact combination of symptoms can differ extremely. In this post I am talking about myself and my own perception. Since I only recently found out that I am an Aspie, I am still exploring the good, the bad, and the ugly. So I don't anticipate this to be a complete testimony or being perceived the same way by anyone else. But it might help sharing my perspective as ideas for others or even explain why some things are more or less important to me than to anyone else.

Note: While writing this I noticed that the downsides are more general than specifically for being a tester, while my Aspie super powers map very well to my job as a tester. So bear with me.

## Some general observations and the downsides

It seems that being an Aspie often comes with a tendency for extremes. I can be extremely happy, extremely unhappy, extremely interested, extremely upset, extremely disinterested, but hardly ever really in the middle. When people laugh at me because I take something extremely seriously, they don't understand that I cannot dial down things easily. It sounds easy. But it's as if the dial in my brain is broken.

Another thing that is very common is an extraordinary perception of one's energy supply. And that most things that neuro-typical people just do without effort, requires conscious labour from Aspies. Taking a simple phone call can drain us. Dealing with the unexpected can drain us. Act like neuro-typical people do in a social setting with regards to "reading the room" takes a lot of energy because it is a conscious effort, and not something that we "just do". So it happens that I spend all my energy at work and in the evening I am no longer capable of social interaction. No. It's not just being a bit tired from the work. It's being exhausted from the social parts as well as the actual work.

Energy, yeah, that is a big topic. When asked if I do automation or ui testing I insist on doing both. They both energise and drain me in very different ways. If I do one of them for too long, again, I am left a wreck. So if I have a frontend heavy week you'll see me fiddle with the automation in waiting times etc. But if it's an automation heavy time, I will use times of waiting for builds etc. to do some FE work. Or simply engage with questions on Slack. 

Another aspect of this is motivation. We all know it is easier to do a task when you are motivated. And just with practically everything else I am tending to be extreme. And there's a dangerous side to this. If I get properly demotivated, it can cost me a huge amount more to do a thing. For example I work ok under pressure, but if I see no way of achieving a set goal, then it utterly demotivates me and seems to cause the complete opposite motivation of what I see in neuro-typicals.

Change. Oh my. If you tell me in the morning that one of my team mates will change teams today, my day is practically over. Well. At least from a mood standpoint. I need some time to adjust to big changes. Luckily not every piece of change comes with a high price tag in energy. And funnily enough I would not want to work in a different environment than an agile one, where change is much more prominently visible than in old fashioned projects. So I don't perceive every change as hard or unwelcome. I welcome bug fixes (wink). And they are changes. But it means that when I plan my day to contain x, y, and z and I get none of them done, because a and b pop up, they need to be really interesting and somewhat valuable or satisfying to not drain me and leave me a wreck after work. 

Engaging with more than one or two people at the same time drains me fast. While I can have a call with the same person for hours and just work side by side with them or work through a problem together, I burn out fast in group discussions. Despite me knowing that sometimes it is much cheaper to having everyone in the same room to try and get everyone on the same page. And when we have a really good discussion with tangible outcomes chances are high that this is even good for my energy reservoir.

I cannot read people well. I am trying my best, but I work out what is going on by guessing, interpreting patterns and simply asking questions. "Reading a room" is incredibly hard for me. I care a lot about people. But I don't always know what's going on inside their heads and hearts. I get told that it is normal for neuro-typical people to sort of absorb the atmosphere and social cues. It's a thing I cannot imagine. I have to work hard for every single one of those. And meeting new people is therefore real labour. A nightmare at work are forced come-togethers, even worse, when you have to snow-ball-invite people you don't know for a sit together "so that everyone makes new friends". I have nothing against new friends. But this is a form of torture for me.

That reminds me of a typical graph of how people learn. You have your comfort zone of things you know. If you leave that zone, you get into the learning zone where things are new and shiny and interesting. And if you leave it too far, then you get to the panic zone where you don't recognise anything anymore. I see people who have an incredibly big learning zone. They can push themselves to extremes before even touching at the panic zone. My comfort zone and my learning zone however are much smaller than what I observe in others. I need familiar elements nearby to catch me so I can take risks and learn. I am not bad at learning, but I panic fast and need to get closer to my comfort zone than others. The zones "wobble" and aren't always the same and a lot of training can expand them. But it plays into everything that I do.

And as problem on top I have sensitivities to certain sounds and light (some others, too, but they usually don't matter too much). That doesn't always play well with an office setting. Funnily enough I always preferred working from the office over working from home before the corona virus hit. But I am the first to complain about ringtones (they don't have to be loud to completely distract me. I can hear the soft beep of a new discord message in a room full of developers working together over at least 5 rows of tables. Provenly!), cringe on loud footsteps, and don't mind wearing a cap inside the office to reduce the amount of light bothering me. 

In total it's not that bad. Yes, there are a few "bugs" here and there and I need to know what drains me, but the downside of me being an Aspie isn't bad compared to what I know other Aspies face. But the cool thing is that I still get to have some super powers.

## Superpowers?

Yes. Well. Not really, since everyone does/has these to a degree. But I see that some of these I do seem to have an advantage because of my ASD over what I observe in others. And I see my strengths to a big part centered in different areas than other testers I have met and worked with who are neuro-typical.

Remember that I said I have trouble with changes? That can be very useful being a tester. Finding things which disappeared, suddenly appear anew or simply are somehow different usually catch my eye easily. If that is a spelling mistake, a missing divider in a list, a disappearing button that is rarely used or anything else. We testers thrive on finding things that are out of the ordinary. And a strong ability of pattern recognition comes with being an Aspie. We train it from being a baby to late in life. Without pattern recognition we suck terribly at human interaction. So we train our whole lives and that training comes handy as a tester.

That energy problem? Also comes with an upside. An Aspie's life is in big parts the work of figuring out how to solve things in a less draining way. You could say we are lazy and sometimes it seems like we are, but it also makes us very inventive when it comes to finding ways of making our lives easier. I don't have the energy to do complicated test setups over and over again by hand. Others might do them two or three times more than I can before I find a way to automate things, ask for help and usually get an answer from an expert who knows a trick or two, or roam the web for a better solution. Over time that means I am creating tools for myself and for my colleagues to make us all better and faster. 

Not being able to read people comes also with the opposite: I have a hard time lying or hiding my feelings. That might sometimes hit as very primal reactions or over-reactions, but it makes me also very reliable. I hate it when I don't live up to my word. Of course I am still human and I make mistakes, but when I give a promise, I will do everything in my power to keep it. And when I say I will do x, y, or z I don't just say it like that. I say such things only when I have a strong intention to do them. I try to be as correct as possible (sometimes me being hasty can botch that though!) which can end in annoying details. But it also means that I won't give false promises. And I will try to keep other people from giving them (which usually backfires, we all know that).

And back to the problem with change: To live a somewhat relaxed life I tend to be rather orderly at work. Terrified of forgetting something and embarrassing myself, I keep track of things well, and put processes in place like what different styles of testing I do in the different environments, to cover as much ground as possible with the least amount of energy spent and the least possible ways of forgetting things. And I share (sometimes overshare 😜) my experiences, hoping that someone else can profit from them and maybe not do the same stupid mistakes I did. 

## Conclusion

Aspies are people like everyone else. But then again, we are not. Officially neuro-divergent we have a different perspective on life and things in life than neuro-typical people (NTs). Some things are incredible hard for us which NTs just do without thinking twice. But we also have some traits that make some things, especially in the field of testing as I find, extremely easy. They seem to be built-in for Aspies. So if I get impatient when someone just doesn't see the pattern, bear with me. I'm really trying hard. And remind me that other people have different strengths. And tell me about yours. I am curious to know how you all "tick", even if it is wondrous for me sometimes.

I will continue my research and my journey as Aspie to play more into my strengths. And I will try and help to inform about neuro-divergent life. Statistically I am not the only person in Fortum or even in my project who is neuro-divergent.

If you find yourself having questions, please feel free to ask. I am pretty open book about these things.
